.. _contextproportion:

======================
Transcript proportions
======================

Summary
=======

The RNA sample are expected to contain a variety of different RNA
species, e.g mRNA, linRNA, rRNA etc. This page presents the relative
fraction of the different species so one can inspect the consistency
and check the samples contain sufficient quantities of the required
species.


Results
=======

The following table lists all genomic contexts that reads map to. 

.. report:: RnaseqqcReport.MappingContext
   :render: table
   :force:

   Number of alignments that align in various genomic contexts


Ribosomal and Repetitive RNA expression
=======================================

Ribosomal RNA is one of the most abundant transcripts in a cell
and dominates RNASeq samples until it is removed. The following
plots examine the number of alignments to ribosomal and repetitive 
RNA. Repetetive RNA annotation is taken from the UCSC repeatmasker 
tracks.

   Proportion of alignments that align to ribosomal annotations across samples.

.. report:: RnaseqqcReport.MappingContentRNA
   :render: stacked-bar-plot
   :split-at: 10


Context stats RNA expression
============================

The following plots examine the number of alignments to long intergenic 
non-coding and micro RNA. RNA annotations are taken from the 
UCSC repeatmasker tracks.

.. report:: RnaseqqcReport.MappingAltContent
   :render: table

   Number of alignments that align to long intergenic non-coding and 
   micro RNAs (from the UCSC repeatmasker track).

.. report:: RnaseqqcReport.MappingAltContent
   :render: stacked-bar-plot
   :split-at: 10

   Proportion of alignments that align to long intergenic non-coding and 
   micro RNAs across samples.


Aims
----
Inspect the relative fraction of the major RNA species

Inputs
------
Tag counts generated by counting reads aligned over annotated
features. 

Outputs
-------
Stacked bar plots showing the fraction of reads coming from rRNA,
lincRNA or protein coding genes


The good

.. report:: GoodExample.Tracker
   :render: myRenderer
   :transform: myTransform
   :options: myAesthetics

   Add a comment about the good example.  What represents good data?

The bad

.. report:: BadExample.Tracker
   :render: myRenderer
   :transform: myTransform
   :options: myAesthetics

   Add a comment about the bad example.  What is specifically bad about this example

More bad examples `<http://myBadData.html >`

Your data:



Commentary
  This will take the form of some active comments.  This will require the report to
  be published so that it is hosted on the CGAT server/ comments on the DISQUS server.

